How do I receive benefits under the Govt. Schemes in my bank account?
To receive DBT benefits in your bank account, please visit the bank branch where you have opened the account and request the bank to link your Aadhaar with your account by filling up the mandate and consent form of the bank. This account will be seeded with NPCI-mapper by the bank to operate as DBT enabled account. 

4(a) How can I check my bank seeding status?

You can check your bank seeding status from - https://myaadhaar.uidai.gov.in/ . However, it may be noted that, the information provided through the link is fetched from the server of National Payment Corporation of India (NPCI). UIDAI is not responsible for its correctness. The information fetched is not stored by UIDAI. Alternatively you can check your bank seeding status from the website of NPCI through following link - https://base.npci.org.in/catalog/seedingRequestDetails

Aadhaar seeding process:
Aadhaar seeding is necessitated for receiving Direct Benefit Transfers (DBT) provided by
various Government schemes. The following is the process flow of Aadhaar seeding
1. Customer to visit the bank branch where he / she is holding an account and submit the duly filled
consent form – Annexure I
2. The bank officials after verifying the details and documents provided (as may be required) and
authenticity of the customer based on the signature will accept Aadhaar seeding consent form and
provide an acknowledgement to the customer.
3. The branch will then link the Aadhaar number to the customer’s account and also in NPCI mapper.
4. Once this activity is completed and Aadhaar number will reflect in NPCI mapper.
Role of the customer:
1. Submit the consent form with complete details either in physical or electronic form as per the facility
provided by his / her bank.
2. In case of moving Aadhaar number from one bank to another bank, the customer should provide the
name of the bank from which the Aadhaar is being moved.
3. In case of physical form, the consent form should be duly signed as per the bank records.
4. After seeding is completed the customer may approach their Gas service provider (Oil Marketing
Company) for the pending subsidy amount.
5. For non-receipt of subsidies customer to approach respective OMC’s through their toll free number :
1800 2333 555
Role of the Bank / Branch:
1. Verifying the completeness of the consent form, checking the documentation and authenticating the
customer’s signature.
2. After the officials are satisfied with the documentation they should carry out the following activities
a. Linking the Aadhaar number to the bank account (in CBS)
b. Updating NPCI mapper
Note: By linking the Aadhaar number to the account the branch is not updating the mapper. The
mapper update process has to be followed by their central team or IT division as the case may be.
3. After the mapper files are uploaded the response files received from NPCI have to be verified.
4. In case of failure in updating any Aadhaar number/s then necessary corrective action has to be
taken and CBS also should be updated accordingly.
5. Customer query / complaint handling
1. Branches should understand that if Aadhaar number is not updated in NPCI mapper the action
is purely lies with the bank only. The customer should not be told that NPCI has not updated the
Aadhaar number.
2. Aadhaar number being active in bank’s CBS does not mean that mapper file is updated, the
branch should not show CBS screen or provide screen shot to the customer confirming seeding.
3. If the customer complaints, the branch should approach their internal team handling Aadhaar
mapping and ascertain the reason for non-updating the Aadhaar in NPCI mapper.
4. After ascertaining the root cause bank should take corrective action and redress the grievance
of the customer.
Responsibility of NPCI:
1. Mapper is a platform provided by NPCI for the banks to update or remove Aadhaar numbers as per
their customer’s request.
2. The activity of updating or removing an Aadhaar number from mapper can be performed only by the
banks.
3. NPCI on its own does not update the mapper records.
4. In case customer approaches NPCI for grievance redressal, NPCI will have to reach out to the
teams concerned in banks for necessary action
5. NPCI will ensure that mapper platform is available, files submitted by banks are processed and
response is provided.
Customer grievance:
1. If the Aadhaar number is not reflecting in NPCI mapper after submitting all the relevant documents
to the bank the action rests with the bank only.
2. The customer should approach the bank’s customer service cell for grievance redressal and follow
escalation matrix if the issue is not resolved.
3. If customer wants to write to NPCI then the copy of the consent form duly acknowledged by the
bank should be provided for taking up with the bank concerned.
4. For any escalations customer may write to npci.dbtl@npci.org.in with Aadhaar consent
acknowledgment copy provided by the bank.
Additional information:
Customer can link only one account with Aadhaar at any point of time.
If customer gives consent to multiple banks then subsidy will be credited to the last seeded Bank
with which the status is active in NPCI mapper.
If Aadhaar status is inactive, customer to visit respective bank branch in person and submit the duly
filled customer consent form.
OMC’s to be approached for reinitiating the failed transactions to last seeded bank account.
